# Tutorial 14
Custom checksum and other custom code injections.

The [CommsDSL](https://github.com/arobenko/CommsDSL-Specification) specification supports 
several predefined most ubiquitous checksum calculation [algorithms](https://arobenko.github.io/commsdsl_spec/#frames-checksum). 
However, there are protocols that define their own checksum calculation logic. In order to support such 
scenario there is a need to to be able to inject custom C++ code into the generated code.

For the sake of this tutorial exercise let's implement a custom checksum which adds **1** to
every byte and then calculates the total sum of the result. Let's also call it `PlusOneSum`.

The [schema](dsl/schema.xml) file of this tutorial contains the following frame definition:
```xml
    <frame name="Frame">
        ...
        <checksum name="Checksum" alg="custom" algName="PlusOneSum" from="Size" >
            <int name="ChecksumField" type="uint16" />
        </checksum>        
    </frame>

```
Note the type of the algorithm is set to be `custom` (**alg="custom"**). Setting of the custom checksum 
algorithm requires knowledge about name of the algorithm, which is provided using **algName** 
property.

Let's take a look at the generated frame code inside [include/tutorial14/frame/Frame.h](include/tutorial14/frame/Frame.h)
```cpp
...
#include "tutorial14/frame/checksum/PlusOneSum.h"
...

namespace tutorial14
{

namespace frame
{

template <typename TOpt = tutorial14::options::DefaultOptions>
struct FrameLayers
{
    ...
    template <typename TMessage, typename TAllMessages>
    using Checksum =
        comms::protocol::ChecksumLayer<
            ...,
            tutorial14::frame::checksum::PlusOneSum,
            ...
        >;
    ...
    
};

...

} // namespace frame

} // namespace tutorial14
```
The important parts are the include of `"tutorial14/frame/checksum/PlusOneSum.h"` as well as
passing `tutorial14::frame::checksum::PlusOneSum` as a checksum calculator type template parameter.
The code generated by the [commsdsl2comms](https://github.com/arobenko/commsdsl) doesn't have relevant
file and the class defined. Hence the compilation of the generated code will fail unless relevant piece of
code is injected.

The injection of the custom code is performed by creating a separate directory, structure of which 
resembles the structure of the output project produced by the [commsdsl2comms](https://github.com/arobenko/commsdsl)
and passing the path to the directory to the [commsdsl2comms](https://github.com/arobenko/commsdsl) (using `-c` parameter) at the
time of code generation (see [commsdsl2comms Manual](https://github.com/arobenko/commsdslhttps://github.com/arobenko/commsdsl/blob/master/doc/Manual_commsdsl2comms.md#injecting-custom-code) for details).

For this tutorial such directory is [dsl_src](dsl_src). The 
[dsl_src/include/tutorial14/frame/checksum/PlusOneSum.h](dsl_src/include/tutorial14/frame/checksum/PlusOneSum.h)
will be copied to the output directory and eventually will be available as 
[include/tutorial14/frame/checksum/PlusOneSum.h](include/tutorial14/frame/checksum/PlusOneSum.h).
The checksum calculation class needs to be implemented in a certain way with proper public interface. Please refer to
the [comms::protocol::ChecksumLayer](https://arobenko.github.io/comms_doc/classcomms_1_1protocol_1_1ChecksumLayer.html) for 
details. The `PlusOneSum` class is implemented inside the required `tutorial14::frame::checksum` namespace.

In addition to the custom checksum, there may be some extravagant protocols for which current out-of-the box
functionality of the [CommsChampion Ecosystem](https://arobenko.github.io/cc) is insufficient and/or incorrect and
some custom code needs to be written. As the example let's define a message that has flags **&lt;set&gt;** field at the end,
which defines how the previously read **4** bytes of data needs to be interpreted. If least significant bit of the flags is cleared than the 
preceding **4** bytes are interpreted as a single `uint32` value, and in case the bit is set, then the preceding **4** bytes
need to be interpreted as two `uint16` values.

The [CommsDSL](https://github.com/arobenko/CommsDSL-Specification) definition of such message may look like this:
```xml
<message name="Msg1" id="MsgId.M1" displayName="^Msg1Name">
    <optional name="F1" defaultMode="exists" >
        <int name="F1" type="uint32" />
    </optional>

    <optional name="F2" defaultMode="missing">
        <int name="F2" type="uint16" />
    </optional>

    <optional name="F3" defaultMode="missing">
        <int name="F3" type="uint16" />
    </optional>
    
    <set name="Flags" length="1">
        <bit name="F2F3" idx="0" />
    </set>
</message>
```
Unfortunately the [CommsDSL](https://github.com/arobenko/CommsDSL-Specification) allows conditions (**&lt;cond&gt;**) for 
**&lt;optional&gt;** field using references to only preceding fields, not to ones that follow, like in this example. The 
default generated code for this example won't do the required functionality. There is a need to modify default
**read** and **refresh** functionalities for this message. They are implemented inside 
[dsl_src/include/tutorial14/message/Msg1.h.read](dsl_src/include/tutorial14/message/Msg1.h.read) and 
[dsl_src/include/tutorial14/message/Msg1.h.refresh](dsl_src/include/tutorial14/message/Msg1.h.refresh)
files. The injected code finds its way into the official protocol generated code in
[include/tutorial14/message/Msg1.h](include/tutorial14/message/Msg1.h)

**REMINDER**: The **refresh** functionality is expected to return `true` when the message state has been
updated and `false` when nothing has changed.

When implementing custom **refresh** functionality it is a good practice to invoke the **refresh** implemented
by the base class, just in case that the default refresh is **NOT** trivial. If it is, the extra unnecessary code will
just be optimized away by the compiler.
```cpp
/// @brief Custom refresh functionality
bool doRefresh()
{
    ...
    bool updated = Base::doRefresh(); // Don't forget default refresh functionality
    ...
    return updated;
}
```

Please note that injection of the code snippets is performed by putting them in the file with special suffix / extension
(appended to the relevant file name with original extension) to let the code generator know what functionality is being injected. 
For example knowledge about injected custom **refresh** functionality will force usage of `comms::option::def::HasCustomRefresh`
option when message class is defined:
```cpp
template <typename TMsgBase, typename TOpt = tutorial14::options::DefaultOptions>
class Msg1 : public
    comms::MessageBase<
        ...,
        comms::option::def::HasCustomRefresh
    >
{
    ...
};
```

The suffixes / extensions recognized by the code generator are:
- **.inc** - Adds extra include statements.
- **.read** - Overwrites default read functionality.
- **.write** - Overwrites default write functionality.
- **.length** - Overwrites default serialization length calculation.
- **.valid** - Overwrites default validity check.
- **.refresh** - Overwrites default refresh functionality.
- **.name** - Overwrites default name retrieval.
- **.public** - Extra code to be added to public class members.
- **.protected** - Extra code to be added to protected class members.
- **.private** - Extra code to be added to private class members.
- **.append** - Extra code to be appended to the end of the generated file.
- **.replace** - Completely replace the generated file with the provided one.
- **.extend** - Forces generation of the original code but with appended **Orig** suffix to allow extension of the original class inside a replacing file.

There are multiple **Msg2.h.X** files inside [dsl_src/include/tutorial14/message](dsl_src/include/tutorial14/message) folder that 
demonstrate usage of the most of the suffixes above and the injected code finds its way to 
[include/tutorial14/message/Msg2.h](include/tutorial14/message/Msg2.h).

Also note that when overriding the default functionalities of the **message**, only the **non-virtual** functions (have **doX()** form) must be redefined, i.e.
[dsl_src/include/tutorial14/message/Msg1.h.read](dsl_src/include/tutorial14/message/Msg1.h.read) defines `doRead()` function, and 
[dsl_src/include/tutorial14/message/Msg1.h.refresh](dsl_src/include/tutorial14/message/Msg1.h.refresh) defines `doRefresh()`
function. When overriding the default functionalities of the stand alone **fields** the function names need to be without any changes, i.e. 
`read()`, `refresh()`, etc...

Below are the expected signatures of the overriding functions for the **message** class:
```cpp
// Read functionality inside *.read
template <typename TIter>
comms::ErrorStatus doRead(TIter& iter, std::size_t len) {...}

// Write functionality inside *.write
template <typename TIter>
comms::ErrorStatus doWrite(TIter& iter, std::size_t len) const {...}

// Length calculation inside *.length
std::size_t doLength() const {...}

// Validity check inside *.valid
bool doValid() const {...}

// Refresh functionality inside *.refresh
bool doRefresh() {...}

// Name retrieval inside *.name
static const char* doName() {...}
```
In case the default functionality of the **field** needs to be overridden, then the function signatures are similar but without **doX** prefix:
```cpp
// Read functionality inside *.read
template <typename TIter>
comms::ErrorStatus read(TIter& iter, std::size_t len) {...}

// Write functionality inside *.write
template <typename TIter>
comms::ErrorStatus write(TIter& iter, std::size_t len) const {...}

// Length calculation inside *.length
std::size_t length() const {...}

// Validity check inside *.valid
bool valid() const {...}

// Refresh functionality inside *.refresh
bool refresh() {...}

// Name retrieval inside *.name
static const char* name() {...}
```

----

**SIDE NOTE**: Injection of custom read / write/ refresh/ etc... functionalities are allowed only for message classes and 
**stand-alone** global fields. Currently overriding of the functionality of the member field defined inside **&lt;message&gt;**
node is not supported. If there is any need for such override, there is a need to move the field into the global **&lt;fields&gt;**
area and use **&lt;ref&gt;** field inside the **&lt;message&gt;** to reference the modified global one.

----

## Summary
- The [CommsChampion Ecosystem](https://arobenko.github.io/cc) allows injection of custom code into
  the generated one.
- The custom checksum calculation is chosen with **alg="custom"** property in conjunction with 
  **algName** which specifies class name of the custom checksum calculation class.
- The frame definition will attempt to include the missing file which is supposed to define 
  checksum calculation class.
- The checksum class definition file needs to be implemented separately and residing in the required relative path to 
  the custom source directory passed to the code generator.
- The checksum definition class must also reside inside the correct namespace used by the frame definition.
- The code snippets for overriding **message** / **field** operation(s) need to reside in the correct relative 
  location and have appropriate extension specifying type of the operation it overrides.

[Read Previous Tutorial](../tutorial13) &lt;-----------------------&gt; [Read Next Tutorial](../tutorial15) 
